---
id: Topological Spaces
aliases: []
tags:
  - topology
---

> [!def] Topology
> A **topology** on a set $X$ is a collection $\cal{T}$ of subsets of $X$ such that 
> 1. $\emptyset,X\in\cal{T}$
> 2. If $\{U_i\}_{i\in I}$ is a collection of subsets in $\cal{T}$, then $\bigcup_{i\in I}U_i\in\cal{T}$
> 3. If $\{U_1,\dots,U_n\}$ is a *finite* collection of subsets in $\cal{T}$, then $\bigcap_{i=1}^n U_i\in\cal{T}$.
>
> A set with a topology is called a **topological space**.

The sets in $\cal{T}$ consist of the topologies **open sets**. A subset $A\subset X$ is **closed** if $X\backslash A$ is open.

We can construct a topology from any set $X$. If we take $\cal{T}$ to be the collection of all subsets $U$ of $X$, we get the **discrete topology**. We could also let $\cal{T}=\{\emptyset,X\}$ to get the **trivial topology**.

We sometimes want to compare two different topologies $\cal{T}$ and $\cal{T}'$ on a set $X$. If $\cal{T}'\supset\cal{T}$, then we say $\cal{T}'$ is **finer** than $\cal{T}$ or $\cal{T}$ is **coarser** than $\cal{T}'$. However, we may have two different topologies on the same set $X$ that are not comparable.

For many topologies, listing out the set of open sets is infeasible. Instead, we give a collection of open sets that generate the topology.

> [!def] Basis
> A **basis** for a topology on $X$ is a collection $\scr{B}$ of subsets in $X$ such that 
> 1. For each $x\in X$, there is some basis element $B\in\scr{B}$ with $x\in B$.
> 2. If $x\in B_1\cap B_2$ for $B_1,B_2\in\scr{B}$, then there is some $B_3\in\scr{B}$ such that $x\in B_3\subset B_1\cap B_2$.
>
> The topology $\cal{T}$ generated by $\scr{B}$ is the collection of sets $U$ such that for all $x\in U$, there is some $B\in\scr{B}$ with $x\in B$ and $B\subset U$.

A classic example is the set of open balls
$$ B_r(x) = \{y\in\R^n\mid \|x-y\|< r\} $$
is a basis for the standard topology on $\R^n$. Another example is the collection of singleton sets is a basis for the discrete topology.

Another way to view the topology generated by $\scr{B}$ is as the set of all unions of elements in $\scr{B}$, i.e., every open set in $\cal{T}$ be expressed by a union of basis elements in $\scr{B}$.

> [!def] Subbasis
> A **subbasis** $\scr{S}$ for a topology on $X$ is a collection of subsets of $X$ whose union equals $X$. The topology generated by $\scr{S}$ is the collection of all unions of finite intersections of sets in $\scr{S}$.

## Product Topology

> [!def] Product Topology
> Let $(X,\cal{T}_X)$ and $(Y,\cal{T}_Y)$ be topological spaces. The **product topology** on $X\times Y$ is generated by the basis 
> $$\scr{B}=\{U\times V\mid U\in\cal{T}_X,~V\in\cal{T}_Y\}.$$

This indeed forms a basis. The first condition is trivial as $X\times Y$ is a basis element. Now let $(x,y)\in (U_1\times V_1)\cap(U_2\times V_2)$. But
$$ (U_1\times V_1)\cap(U_2\times V_2) = (U_1\cap U_2)\times (V_1\cap V_2) $$
and $U_1\cap U_2$ and $V_1\cap V_2$ are open.

It is worth noting that $\scr{B}$ is simply a basis, not a topology.

###### An alternative construction:
Let $\scr{B}$ be a basis for $X$ and $\scr{C}$ be a basis for $Y$. Then 
$$ \scr{D} = \{B\times C\mid B\in\scr{B},~C\in\scr{C}\} $$
is a basis for $X\times Y$.

## Subspace Topology

> [!def] Subspace Topology
> Let $(X,\cal{T})$ be a topological space and $Y$ a subset of $X$. The collection
> $$ \cal{T}_Y = \{Y\cap U\mid U\in\cal{T}\} $$
> is the **subspace topology** on $Y$.

The subspace topology is taken by restricting each open set to live in $Y$. Note that it may be the case that a set is open in the subspace but not the whole space. For example, let $Y=[0,1]\subset\R$. Then the set $[0,1)$ is open in $Y$ but not open in $\R$.

If $\scr{B}$ is a basis for $X$, then 
$$ \scr{B}_Y = \{B\cap Y\mid B\in\scr{B}\} $$
is a basis for the subspace $Y$.

> [!thm]
> If $A$ is a subspace of $X$ and $B$ is a subspace of $Y$, then $A\times B$ as a product space and $A\times B$ as a subspace have the same topology.

This result falls from the fact that 
$$ (U\times V)\cap(A\times B) = (U\cap A)\times (V\cap B). $$
