---
tags:
  - daily-notes
  - ohcp
date: 2026-05-11
---
Recall that a homology class $[b]\in H_q(K;\Z)$ is said to have **torsion** if there is an integer $n\in\Z$ such that $n\cdot[b]=0$, i.e, there is a chain $c\in C_{p+1}(K)$ such that $nb = \partial c$. I claim that $[b]$ being **torsion-free** is a necessary condition for the OHCP LP giving integral solutions.

Assume that there is some $n\in\Z$ and chain $c\in C_{p+1}(K)$ such that $nb=\partial c$. Then notice that letting $y=c/n$ gives
$$
	\begin{bmatrix} I & B \end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ c/n\end{bmatrix} = \frac{1}{n}Bc = b,
$$
which has a cost of
$$
	0\cdot\sum_{i=1}^m|x_i| = 0.
$$
Thus, $[0,c/n]^\top$ is the optimal solution and is fractional.

---

Recall from [[2026-05-07]] that it appears that $\Z^m/\Lambda(B)\cong(\Z/k\Z)^t$ where 
$$
	\Lambda(B) = \{Bz:z\in\Z^m\}.
$$
Thus, it follows that $x_B\in\Z^m$ if and only if $b\in\Lambda(B)$, i.e., $b\in[0]\in\Z^m/\Lambda(B)$. This leads the question, **what condition results in $b$ laying the 0 coset?**

Assume that $b,b'\in C_p(K)$ such that $[b]=[b']$ and $b\in[0]$. Then $b'=b+\partial c$ for some $c\in C_{p+1}(K)$. Moreover, it follows that
$$
	G_Bb' = G_B(b + \partial c) = G_Bb + G_B\partial c.
$$
Thus, $b'\in[0]$ whenever
$$
	G_B\partial c\equiv 0\bmod k_B.
$$
Unfortunately, numerical experiments show that $G_B[\partial]\not\equiv 0\bmod k_B$ which would have directly shown that $b\in[0]$ if and only if $b'\in[0]$. That being said, this result also does not disprove the claim.

Take the following instance:
```
Testing B_5808.txt
 - G[\partial]
<Compressed Sparse Row sparse matrix of dtype 'int64'
	with 26 stored elements and shape (1, 444)>
  Coords	Values
  (0, 0)	2
  (0, 3)	-2
  (0, 27)	-2
  (0, 29)	-2
  (0, 125)	1
  (0, 130)	1
  (0, 131)	-1
  (0, 137)	-1
  (0, 141)	1
  (0, 142)	-2
  (0, 143)	1
  (0, 152)	1
  (0, 154)	1
  (0, 155)	-2
  (0, 160)	-2
  (0, 163)	1
  (0, 165)	-1
  (0, 183)	2
  (0, 185)	-2
  (0, 221)	2
  (0, 222)	2
  (0, 226)	2
  (0, 228)	-2
  (0, 244)	2
  (0, 249)	2
  (0, 250)	-2
```

What happens if we set $b'=b+\partial c$ where $c=e_{125}$? If the same basis $B$ was encountered, then $G[\partial]c = 1\not\equiv0\bmod k_B$ which would imply that we do not get an integral solution despite $[b']=[b]$. However, there is no guarantee that the same basis would be encountered. Upon testing, setting $b'$ as the input gave a different set of basis matrices encountered. In fact, further testing shows that
$$
	Gb' \not\equiv  0\bmod k
$$
but $x_B=B^{-1}b'\not\ge0$, i.e., $B$ is not a feasible basis for $b'$.

**Conjecture:** Let $b'=b+\partial c$ in which $b\in[0]$. Then for any feasible basis $B$ of $b$ in which $B$ is a feasible basis of $b'$, it follows that
$$
	G_Bb'\equiv0\bmod k_B.
$$
Consequently, $b'\in[0]$.

The above can be thought of as the following conditions
- $B^{-1}b\ge 0$
- $B^{-1}(b+\partial c)\ge 0$
- $G_Bb\equiv0\bmod k_B$
imply that $G_B(b+\partial c)\equiv0\bmod k_B$.

Consider the following cone
$$
	\cal{F}_B = \{b\in C_q(K;\Z):B^{-1}b\ge0\}
$$
which consists of all right-hand side vectors $b$ such that $B$ is a feasible basis. From experimentation, we know that is possible for $[b]=[b']$ with $b\in \cal{F}_B$ but $b'\not\in\cal{F}_B$. But, does it follow that if $b'=b+\partial c\in\cal{F}_B$, then $G_B\partial c\equiv0\bmod k_B$? Note that if $B^{-1}\partial c\ge0$, then it follows that $\partial c\in\cal{F}_B$, but it may be the case that $\partial c\not\in\cal{F}_B$.

Define
$$
	\cal{C}_B = \{c\in C_{q+1}(K;\Z):B^{-1}\partial c\ge -B^{-1}b\}.
$$
Then we need that $G_B\partial c\equiv 0\bmod k_B$ for all $c\in\cal{C}_B$. Note that if $B^{-1}\partial c\in\Z^{m}$, then we get $G_B\partial c\equiv 0\bmod k$ for free. Indeed,
$$
	x_B = B^{-1}\partial c = V\begin{bmatrix}F\partial c\\\frac{1}{k}G_B\partial c\end{bmatrix}\in\Z^m
$$
if and only if $G_B\partial c\equiv0\bmod k$ as $F\in\Z^{m\times n}$ and $V$ is unimodular.

---

Right now our only known sufficient condition is that $b\in\cal{B}$ where
$$
	\cal{B} = \bigcap_{\text{feasible bases $B$}}\{b\in C_q(K;\Z):G_Bb\equiv0\bmod k_B\}.
$$
We also know that the cone
$$
	\cal{F}_B=\{b\in C_q(K;\Z): B^{-1}b\ge0\}
$$
does not contain homology classes. That is, $[b]=[b']$ and $b\in\cal{F}_B$ **does not** imply that $b'\in\cal{F}_B$. Notice that because $\Z^m/\Lambda(B)\cong(\Z/k\Z)^{t}$ it follows that $[\Z^m:\cal{B}_B]=k_B^{t_B}$ where
$$
	\cal{B}_B = \{b\in\Z^m:G_Bb\equiv0\bmod k_B\}.
$$
Recall that $[G:H\cap K]\le[G:H][G:K]$. Thus it follows that
$$
	[\Z^m:\cal{B}]\le\prod_{\text{feasible bases $B$}}k_B^{t_B}
$$
which is likely huge. Numerical tests put this upper bound at least $10^{123}$. This is an upper bound, we would like a lower bound.

We can slightly improve this condition. Let $B_1,\dots,B_\ell$ be the bases visited during simplex method. Define 
$$
	\cal{B}_n = \bigcap_{i=1}^n\{b\in\Z^m:G_{B_i}b\equiv 0\bmod k_{B_i}\}
$$
where $G_B=0$ when $|\det B|=1$. Then the condition becomes that
$$
\begin{bmatrix}G_{B_1}\\ G_{B_2}\\\vdots\\ G_{B_\ell}\end{bmatrix}b\equiv \begin{bmatrix}0\\0\\\vdots\\0\end{bmatrix}\bmod \begin{bmatrix}k_1\\ k_2\\\vdots\\ k_\ell\end{bmatrix}
$$
where the modulo congruence is done entry-wise. Notice that $G_{B_i}b\equiv 0\bmod k_i$ is true if and only if $G_{B_i}b-k_iI_{t_i}z=0$ for some $z\in\Z^m$. Thus we may define the system
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
	G_{B_1} & -k_1I_{t_1} \\
	G_{B_2} & & -k_2I_{t_2} \\
	\vdots & & & \ddots \\
	G_{B_\ell} & & & & -k_\ell I_{t_\ell}
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix}b\\ z_1\\\vdots\\ z_\ell\\\end{bmatrix} = 0,
$$
which we denote in short form by $Cw=0$. From, here we get that
$$
	\cal{B} = \{b\in\Z^m:\exists z\in\Z^{(\sum t_i)-m}\text{ s.t. }C\begin{bmatrix}b^\top&z^\top\end{bmatrix}^\top=0\}.
$$

