---
date: 2024-09-19
tags:
  - daily-notes
  - steinhaus
---
Below is a summary of the current stability results in [[Steinhaus Filtration and Stable Paths in the Mapper]].

---

Recall the Steinhaus filtration $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U})$ is defined as the nerve of a cover $\cal{U}$ where a simplex $\sigma$ is alive at time $\alpha$ if 
$$
	d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\sigma\}) = 1-\frac{\mu(\bigcap U_i)}{\mu(\bigcup U_i)} \le \alpha,
$$
i.e., we get a filtered complex
$$
	K_0\hookrightarrow K_{\alpha_1}\hookrightarrow K_{\alpha_2} \hookrightarrow\cdots\hookrightarrow K_{\alpha_k} \hookrightarrow K_1=\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U})
$$
where $K_\alpha$ is the subcomplex consisting of simplices whose Steinhaus distance of it's corresponding covers is at least $\alpha$.

Given two Steinhaus filtrations $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U})$ and $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{V})$, we want to find a condition such that the two filtrations are $\epsilon$-interleaving, i.e., some condition $P(\epsilon)$ such that under $P(\epsilon)$ it follows that for all $i$,
$$
	d_{St}(V_i) - \epsilon \le d_{St}(U_i) \le d_{St}(V_i) + \epsilon
$$
and
$$
	d_{St}(U_i) - \epsilon \le d_{St}(V_i) \le d_{St}(U_i) + \epsilon.
$$

The paper constructs a metric, named the **bottleneck metric on covers**:

> [!def] Bottleneck metric on covers
> Let $\cal{U}$ and $\cal{V}$ be two finite covers of a finite set $X$ with the same cardinality, and let $\cal{M}(\cal{U},\cal{V})$ be the set of all possible matchings between them. Let $\Delta$ denote the symmetric difference. Then define
> $$
> 	d_B(\cal{U},\cal{V}) = \min_{M\in\cal{M}(\cal{U},\cal{V})}\left\{\max_{(U,V)\in M}\mu(U\Delta V)\right\}.
> $$


Breakdown of bottleneck metric on covers:
- Given a matching between two covers of equal cardinality, find the pair $(U,V)$ of matched covers such that the measure of $(U\cup V)\setminus(U\cap V)$ is maximal, i.e., the matched pairs of covers with the largest non-overlapping volume.
- For all possible matchings, take the matching that gives the minimal measure as described above.

Theorem 3.5 presents the main stability result on interleaving.

> [!thm]
> Suppose that $\cal{U}=\{U_i\}$ and $\cal{V}=\{V_j\}$ are two covers of $X$ with the same cardinality such that $d_B(\cal{U},\cal{V})\le\alpha$. Then $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U})$ and $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{V})$ are $\alpha/m$ interleaved where 
> $$
> 	m = \min\left\{\min_{U\in\cal{U}}\mu(U),\min_{V\in\cal{V}}\mu(V)\right\}.
> $$

**Proof:** We assume that $\alpha$ is a positive integer and $d_B(\cal{U},\cal{V})=\alpha$. What is the largest change in Steinhaus distance possible between $U_I$ and $V_J$ where $I$ and $J$ are paired elementwise in a matching? Keep $U_I$ fixed and we try to maximize the change in $\mu(\bigcap U_I)/\mu(\bigcup U_I)$.

Consider taking the symmetric difference of $U_i$ with a set $S_i$ with $\mu(S_i)\le\alpha$. We can partition $S_i$ into two sets $s_{i,1}=U_i\cap S_i$ and $S_{i,2}=S_i\setminus s_{i,1}$. The greatest change to the Steinhaus distance occurs if we can select an $S_i$ for each $U_i$ such that replacing each $U_i$ with $U_i\Delta S_i$ increases or decreases the numerator with $\mu(s_{i,1})$ or $\mu(s_{i,2})$ respectively but does the opposite change to the size of the denominator by $\mu(s_{i,2})$ or $\mu(S_{i,1})$ respectively. In such a case, each change increases or decreases the size of the intersection, and does the opposite to the size of the union. ???

**The above paragraph is not clear to me**

By Lemma 3.3 and Corollary 3.4, the maximum possible change is achieved when all weight is directed toward increasing or decreasing the size of the intersection. Notice that
$$
	1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I)+S\alpha}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} \le 1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap U_I)}{\mu(\bigcup U_I)} \le 1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I) - S\alpha}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)}
$$
where $S$ is the cover cardinality.

Thus,
$$
\begin{align*}
	1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I) + S\alpha}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} &\le 1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap U_I)}{\mu(\bigcup U_I)} \\
	\Leftrightarrow 1-\frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I)}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} - \frac{S\alpha}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} &\le d_{St}(U_I) \\
	\Rightarrow 1-\frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I)}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} - \frac{S\alpha}{Sm} &\le d_{St}(U_I) \\
	\Leftrightarrow d_{St}(V_I)-\frac{\alpha}{m} &\le d_{St}(U_I)
\end{align*}
$$
Likewise,
$$
\begin{align*}
	1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I) - S\alpha}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} &\ge 1-\frac{\mu(\bigcap U_I)}{\mu(\bigcup U_I)} \\
	1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I)}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} + \frac{S\alpha}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} &\ge d_{St}(U_I) \\
	\Rightarrow1 - \frac{\mu(\bigcap V_I)}{\mu(\bigcup V_I)} - \frac{S\alpha}{Sm} &\ge d_{St}(U_I) \\
	d_{St}(V_I) + \frac{\alpha}{m} &\ge d_{St}(U_I).
\end{align*}
$$
Therefore, $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U})$ and $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{V})$ are $\alpha/m$ interleaved.
<p align='right'>Q.E.D.</p>
