---
id: "2024-04-08"
aliases:
  - April 8, 2024
tags:
  - daily-notes
---

# notebooks/ICML_Code/PathsonRecSys.ipynb

Need to download [MovieLens 20m Data Set](https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/20m/) (190 MB).

Data sets:
- ratings.csv
    - 3 columns: userId, movieId, rating
- movies.csv
    - 3 columns: movieId, title, genres (| separated)

We load the ratings.csv and movies.csv data sets and create a subset of movies based on the number of ratings.
- Create a map `movies_map` from movieId -> list of user ids
- Create a subset `slim_movies_map` of `movies_map` by keeping movies with at least 10 ratings
- Create a subset `slimer_movies_map` of `movies_map` randomly including some movies and making sure to include a few select movies. The number of movies goes from 22,884 to ~216. 

**Question:** Is the slimming of `movies_map` just for shorter computational time? Or is there some statistical advantage of a smaller sample size?

### Building 1-skeleton:

The code simply generates a Cech complex but instead of balls we use Jaccard distance.
$$
    J(\{C_i\}) = 1 - \frac{|\cap_i C_i|}{|\cup_i C_i|}
$$
The covers $C_i$ contain all movies seen by viewer $i$. Thus, the intersection would give all movies seen by a group of reviewers. Hence, if $J(\{C_i\})<1$, it follows that at least two movies were rated by each person, that is, the covers intersect.

In terms of the mapper, our filter function is given by 
$$\text{movies}\mapsto\text{viewer ratings}.$$
We cover the space of viewers with singleton sets, resulting in the preimage giving movies seen by the same person.

Although, this map is not a function as movies are rated by more than one individual.

1. Starts with `Cover.build`:
- Create 0-simplices, one for each movie.
- For all $k$-combinations of movies ($k=2,\dots,max\_dim+2$) Jaccard distance of the covers. If it is less than 1, add $(k-1)$-simplex. **Question:** Why create 2-simplices if just taking the 1-skeleton?
- Sample result:
```
[([3], 0.0), ([100], 0.0), ([253], 0.0), ([447], 0.0), ([574], 0.0), ([688], 0.0), ([702], 0.0), ([753], 0.0), ([1127], 0.0), ([1197], 0.0), ([1269], 0.0), ([1314], 0.0), ([1386], 0.0), ([1459], 0.0), ([1659], 0.0), ([1907], 0.0), ([1909], 0.0),...((117533, 118930), 0.9782608695652174)]
```
2. Generate a `nx.Graph` representing the 1-skeleton

