---
tags:
  - daily-notes
date: 2025-10-07
---
We want to create a non-trivial codimension 2 example in 4-D. Instead of starting with a mesh in 4-D and finding a 2-complex as input, we can do the reverse. That is, start with the 2-complex given as a mesh in 3-D, and embed the mesh into a 4-D cube.

Embedding a 3-D mesh in 4-D is quite straight forward. We can either set the 4th dimension $w$ to a constant value, or use some function of $x,y,z$.

The problem is that we need the triangles of the embedded 3-D mesh to correspond to triangles in the 4-D cube complex. The following is my strategy, which may or may not work.

- Start with a 3-D mesh (for example a torus)
- Embed the 3-D mesh into $\R^4$ by a linear combination $w=\alpha x + \beta y + \gamma z$ such that $x,y,z,w\in[0,1]$
- Create a uniform grid of points in $[0,1]^4$
	- Exclude all points within $\epsilon$ units away from a vertex of the torus
- Take the $n$-d Delaunay complex using `gudhi` of `scipy`

Alternative strategy:
- Start with a 3-D mesh (for example a torus)
- Embed the 3-D mesh into $\R^4$ by a linear combination $w=\alpha x + \beta y + \gamma z$ such that $x,y,z,w\in[0,1]$
- For each triangle $[a,b,c]$, construct a tetrahedra $[a,b,c,d]$ by adding another vertex $d$ along the triangle's normal vector
	- Requires transforming the normal vector during embedding
	- Perhaps also add in opposite normal direction to fill in the void of torus
- Fill the remaining of the space with grid of points in $[0,1]^4$ as before
- Take the $n$-d Delaunay complex

Strategy doesn't appear to work.

New strategy:

- Start with the same method as before
- For each triangle in the mesh
	- Map the vertices to the closest vertex in the tetrahedralization
	- Take the new triangle formed

Concern is if the new triangle is not a valid triangle in the complex. Perhaps I could take a collection of triangles which make up the triangle?