---
id: 2024-04-16
aliases:
  - April 16, 2024
tags:
  - daily-notes
date: 2024-04-16
---

## Gromov-Hausdorff Distance

Summary of notes on the Hausdorff and Gromov-Hausdorff distance (see https://www2.math.upenn.edu/~brweber/Lectures/USTC2011/Lecture%205%20-%20Gromov-Hausdorff%20distance.pdf)

Let $A$ be a set in a metric space $X$ and $r>0$. The **r-thickening** or **r-neighborhood** of $A$ is given by the cover of balls centered at each point of $A$ with radius $r$, i.e.,
$$
    A^{(r)} = \bigcup_{x\in A}B_x(r).
$$
> [!def] Hausdorff distance
> For *closed* sets $A,B$ in $X$, we define the **Hausdorff distance** by 
> $$
>    d_H(A,B) = \inf\{r>0\mid B\subset A^{(r)}\text{ and }A\subset B^{(r)}\},
>$$

One may show that $d_H(A,B)$ is the farthest distance any point of $B$ is from $A$, or the farthest distance any point of $A$ is from $B$ (take the larger one). Moreover, the set of closed sets in $X$ with $d_H$ forms a metric.

Note that if $X$ is not bounded, there may be closed sets $A$ and $B$ with $d_H(A,B)=\infty$.

The Gromov-Hausdorff distance generalizes the Hausdorff distance.

> [!def] Gromov-Hausdorff distance
> Given two closed metric spaces $A$ and $B$, the **Gromov-Hausdorff** distance is given by
> $$
>   d_{GH}(A,B) = \inf_{f,g}d_H(f_{A\rightarrow X}(A), f_{B\rightarrow X}(B))
> $$
where $f_{A\rightarrow X}$ denotes an isometric embedding of $A$ into some metric space $X$. The infimum is taken over all such embeddings.

In other words, we embed the two metric spaces $A$ and $B$ into some larger metric space $X$ and find the Hausdorff distance. We then take the smallest value given across all possible embeddings.

## Bottleneck Distance

Recall that a persistence diagram is simply a set of points in $\R^2$. Let $X$ and $Y$ be two such persistence diagrams. We want to define a distance between the two diagrams. If $X$ and $Y$ have the same cardinality, we can find bijections $\eta:X\rightarrow Y$ between the two. For each bijection we find the supremum of distances between a point in $X$ and its corresponding point in $Y$. We then want to the tahe smallest distance found. That is,

> [!def] Bottleneck Distance
> The **bottleneck distance** between two persistence diagrams is given by 
> $$
>   W_\infty(X,Y) = \inf_{\eta:X\rightarrow Y}\sup_{x\in X}\|x-\eta(x)\|_\infty.
> $$

One may easily see that $W_\infty$ is a metric.
