---
date: 2024-11-08
tags:
  - daily-notes
  - steinhaus
---
We have showed that 
$$
	d(\cal{U},\cal{V}) = \frac{1}{2}\inf\{\textup{dis}(C)\mid C:\cal{U}\rightrightarrows\cal{V}\text{ is a correspondence}\}
$$
where
$$
	\textup{dis}(C) = \sup\{|d_{St}(\{U_i:i\in\sigma\}) - d_{St}(\{V_i:i\in\tau\})|:(\sigma,\tau)\in C\}
$$
is a pseudometric. We seek an example where $d(\cal{U},\cal{V})=0$ but $\cal{U}$ and $\cal{V}$ are not isomorphic.

Let $p\in\R^2$ be a point and construct $\cal{U}=\{B_1(p)\}$ and $\cal{V}=\{B_\epsilon(p)\}_{\epsilon\in[0,1]}$, where $B_\epsilon(p)$ is the ball of radius $\epsilon$ centered at $p$. Clearly the Mapper complexes corresponding to $\cal{U}$ and $\cal{V}$ are not isomorphic. Consider the multi-valued map $C_\epsilon:\mathcal{U}\rightrightarrows\mathcal{V}$ given by
$$
	C_\epsilon = \{(\{p\},B_{\epsilon'}(p)):\epsilon'\ge\sqrt{1-\epsilon}\}.
$$
Then under the Lebesgue measure,
$$
\begin{align*}
	\textup{dis}(C_\epsilon) &= \sup_{\alpha,\beta\in(0,1)}\left\{\left|\frac{\mu(B_1(p))}{\mu(B_1(p))}-\frac{\mu(B_\alpha(p))}{\mu(B_\beta(p))}\right|:\beta\ge\alpha\ge\sqrt{1-\epsilon}\right\} \\
	&= \sup_{\alpha,\beta\in(0,1)}\left\{\left|1-\frac{\alpha^2}{\beta^2}\right|:\beta\ge\alpha\ge\sqrt{1-\epsilon}\right\} \\
	&= 1-\frac{1-\epsilon}{1} \\
	&= \epsilon.
\end{align*}
$$

Therefore,
$$
	d(\mathcal{U},\mathcal{V}) \le \frac{1}{2}\inf\epsilon = 0.
$$

Unfortunately, $C_\epsilon$ is not correspondence. While $C_\epsilon$ is a multi-valued map, $C_\epsilon^\top$ is not. In fact the only correspondence here is $C=\cal{U}\times\cal{V}$. Under this correspondence,
$$
	\textup{dis}(C) = \sup_{\alpha,\beta\in(0,1)}\left\{\left|\frac{\mu(B_1(p))}{\mu(B_1(p))}-\frac{\mu(B_\alpha(p))}{\mu(B_\beta(p))}\right|:\beta\ge\alpha>0\right\} = 1-\frac{0}{1} = 1.
$$
Moreover, the cover $\mathcal{V}$ is not a valid Mapper cover.

Let $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U})$ and $\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{V})$ be non-isomorphic Mapper complexes and assume that $d(\cal{U},\cal{V})=0$. We have that $H_*(\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U}))$ and $H_*(\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{V}))$ are 0-interleaving, i.e., isomorphic, but this does not imply that the complexes themselves are isomorphic. For example, $S^1\times S^1$ and $S^1\vee S^1\vee S^2$ have the same homology groups but are not isomorphic. 
