---
date: 2024-10-04
tags:
  - daily-notes
  - steinhaus
---
Last time ([[2024-09-27]]) we constructed a pseudometric which gave a condition on $\epsilon$ such that $H(\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U}))$ and $H(\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{V}))$ are $\epsilon$-interleaved. We now seek a condition for which $H(\textup{Nrv}_{St}(\cal{U}))$ is $q$-tame. Obviously if $\cal{U}$ is a finite cover, then we are done. So we work in the case that $\cal{U}$ is infinite. It suffices to show that it $\epsilon$-interleaves with a finite dimensional space. Making use of our current result we just need to construct an $\epsilon$-simplicial correspondence to a finite space.

In [[Persistence stability for geometric complexes]] they show that if $X$ is totally bounded then $H(\R\text{ips}(X))$ is $q$-tame by showing it $\epsilon$-interleaves with an $\epsilon/2$-sample for all $\epsilon$. We try the same strategy.

Our goal is given a cover $\cal{U}$ constructed by the MAPPER, construct a correspondence $C:\cal{U}\rightrightarrows\cal{V}$ to a finite cover $\cal{V}$ that satisfies
$$
	|d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\sigma\}) - d_{St}(\{V_i\mid i\in\tau\})| < \frac{1}{2}\epsilon,~\forall (\sigma,\tau)\in C. 
$$

Assume that $\cal{U}$ is a cover in a totally bounded space. Then there is a finite collection of open balls $\cal{V}=\{V_i\}_{i=1}^n$ of radius $\epsilon/2$ such that 
$$
	\bigcup_{U_i\in\cal{U}} U_i \subseteq \bigcup_{i=1}^nV_i.
$$
Define the map
$$
	C = \{(U,V)\in\cal{U}\times\cal{V}\mid d_{St}(U,V) < \frac{1}{2}\epsilon\}.
$$

**Question:** Is this map well-defined? I'm fairly certain it is not.

Notice then that
$$
\begin{align*}
	|d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\sigma\}) - d_{St}(\{V_j\mid j\in\tau\})| &= \left|\frac{\mu(\bigcup V_j)}{\mu(\bigcap V_j)} - \frac{\mu(\bigcup U_i)}{\mu(\bigcap U_i)}\right| \\
	???
\end{align*}
$$

---

Assume that $\cal{U}$ is a cover in a totally bounded space $(X,d_X)$. Let $F$ be an $\epsilon/2$-sample of $X$, i.e., for all $x\in X$ there is some $f\in F$ such that $d_X(x,f)<\epsilon/2$. For each cover element $U\in\cal{U}$ construct the set
$$
	V = \{y\in F\mid \exists x\in U\text{ such that }d_X(x,y)<\epsilon/2\}.
$$
We then define the map $C:\cal{U}\rightarrow\cal{V}$ given by $C(U)=V$. Since $X$ is totally bounded, $F$ is finite. So $\cal{V}$ is also finite.

We want to show that for all $(\sigma,\tau)\in C$
$$
	|d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\sigma\}) - d_{St}(\{V_i\mid i\in\tau\})| < \frac{1}{2}\epsilon.
$$
No clue how to do this...

Also if we used the Lebesgue measure in $\cal{V}$ land, then all the measures would be zero.

---

Assume that $\cal{U}$ is a cover of a compact space. Then $\cal{U}$ has a finite subcover $\cal{V}\subseteq\cal{U}$. Define the map $C:\cal{U}\rightarrow\cal{V}$ defined by
$$
	C(U) = \textup{arg}\min_{V\in\cal{V}}\{d_{St}(U,V)\},
$$
i.e., the cover element $V$ closest to $U$ in terms of Steinhaus distance. Note that if $U\in\cal{V}$, then $C(U)=U$.

Then for all $(\sigma,\tau)\in C$,
$$
\begin{align*}
	|d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\sigma\}-d_{St}(\{V_i\mid i\in\tau\})| &= |d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\sigma\}-d_{St}(\{U_i\mid i\in\tau\})|.
\end{align*}
$$

**Claim:** $\tau$ is a face of $\sigma$.

In such a case, we get that this absolute difference is the birth time of $\sigma$ minus the birth time of $\tau$. However, it is not clear that this difference can be made arbitrarily small.

