---
id: Homology Groups
aliases:
  - homology
  - homology group
  - homology groups
tags:
  - computational-topology
---

> [!def] p-chain
> A **p-chain** (for $p\le \textup{dim}K$), of $K$ is a formal sum of the $p$-simplices $\sigma_1,\dots,\sigma_m$ in $K$
> $$
>  c = \sum_{i=1}^ma_i\sigma_i
> $$
> where $a_i$ are coefficients in some underlying group $G$.

Typically the underlying group $G$ is $\Z_2$ or $\Z$.

One may think of $p$-chains as vectors with elements in $G$. In fact, we can easily construct a group by defining the operation to be as we expect:
$$
	c + c' = \sum_{i=1}^m(a_i+a_i')\sigma_i.
$$
Under this operation we get $C_p(K)$,  the group of $p$-chains of $K$. For a [[Simplices|simplicial complex]] $K$, there always exists $C_p(K)$ for $0\le p\le\textup{dim}K$. For $p<0$ or $p>\dim K$, we define $C_p$ to be the trivial group.

When a simplicial complex $K$ has finitely many simplices $m$, the $p$-chains group $C_p$ is finitely generated by the **elementary p-chains** $e_1,\dots,e_m$ where
$$
	e_i = \sigma_i.
$$

## Boundary Map
We can connect chain groups $C_p$ with the boundary map $\partial_p:C_p\rightarrow C_{p-1}$.

> [!def] Boundary
> The **boundary** of a $p$-simplex is the $(p-1)$-chain formed by taking the sum of all $(p-1)$-faces, i.e., if $\sigma=[v_0v_1\dots v_p]$, then
> $$
> \partial_p\sigma = \sum_{j=0}^p(-1)^j[v_0\dots\hat{v_i}\dots v_p],
> $$
> where $\hat{v_i}$ denote an omitted vertex.

Note that when working over $\Z_2$, $(-1)^j=1$ for all $j$. So the boundary becomes
$$
	\partial_p\sigma = \sum_{j=0}^p[v_0\dots\hat{v_i}\dots v_p].
$$
Thus, given a $p$-chain $c=\sum_{i=1}^ma_i\sigma_i$, the **p-th boundary map** is defined by 
$$
	\partial_p c = \sum_{i=1}^ma_i(\partial_p\sigma_i).
$$
One may verify that $\partial_p$ is in fact a homomorphism, that is, $\partial_p(c+c')=\partial_pc +\partial_p c'$.

Since $\partial_p$ is defined for $1\le p\le\dim K$,  we get a chain (called a **chain complex**) of boundary homomorphisms:
$$
\cdots\xrightarrow{\partial_{p+2}}C_{p+1}\xrightarrow{\partial_{p+1}}C_p\xrightarrow{\partial_p}C_{p-1}\xrightarrow{\partial_{p-1}}\cdots
$$
Note that the chain complex forms an abstract simplicial complex.

## Cycles and Boundaries
> [!def] p-cycle
> A **p-cycle** is a $p$-chain $c$ with empty boundary, i.e., $\partial_pc=0$.

The set of $p$-cycles, $Z_p$, is a subgroup of $C_p$. More specifically, 
$$
	Z_p=\Ker\partial_p.
$$
Typically, $Z_p$ is a proper subgroup of $C_p$, however for any 0-simplex $v_j$, $\partial_0 v_j=0$. Thus, when $p=0$ we get that $Z_0=C_0$.

> [!def] p-boundary
> A **p-boundary** $b$ is a $p$-chain that is the boundary of some $(p+1)$-chain, i.e., $b=\partial_{p+1}c$ for some $c\in C_{p+1}$. 

The set of $p$-boundaries, $B_p$ is a subgroup of $C_p$. More specifically,
$$
	B_p = \textup{Im}\partial_{p+1}.
$$
In fact, $B_p$ is actually a subgroup of $Z_p$ due to the fundamental law of homology:

> [!thm] Fundamental Law of Homology
> $\partial_p\partial_{p+1}c=0$ for all $p\in\Z$

Therefore, our chain complex
$$
\cdots\xrightarrow{\partial_{p+2}}C_{p+1}\xrightarrow{\partial_{p+1}}C_p\xrightarrow{\partial_p}C_{p-1}\xrightarrow{\partial_{p-1}}\cdots
$$
is exact, i.e., $\textup{Im}\partial_{p+1}=\Ker\partial_p$.

## Homology Groups

> [!def] Homology Group
> The **p-th homology group** is the [[Quotient Group|quotient group]] 
> $$
> 	H_p = Z_p/B_p.
> $$
> and is composed of classes of cycles that are not boundaries.

Each element of $H_p$ is given by adding $p$-boundaries to a given $p$-cycle: $z+B_p$. Another $z'$ is in the same class as $z$ if $z'+B_p = z+B_p$. In such a case, $z$ and $z'$ are called **homologous** which is denoted $z\sim z'$.

The operation in $H_p$ is the typical quotient group operation:
$$
	(z + B_p) + (z' + B_p) = (z+z') + B_p.
$$
Therefore, $H_p$ is abelian as our underlying group is either $\Z$ or $\Z_2$.
